Add logql basics (#2140)
giantswarm/docs: src/content/vintage/getting-started/observability/visualization/log-exploration/index.md

---
linkTitle: How to explore logs with LogQL
title: Exploring logs with LogQL
description: Guide explaining how to get explore logs of your management and workload clusterrs stored in Giant Swarm managed Loki.
menu:
  main:
    identifier: getting-started-observability-visualization-exploring-logs
    parent: getting-started-observability-visualization
weight: 40
aliases:
  - /getting-started/observability/visualization/exploring-logs
last_review_date: 2024-02-26
user_questions:
  - How can I access logs from my installation?
  - Where can I find workload cluster logs?
  - Which logs are gathered in my installation?
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-atlas
---

> Logs, which are records of events and activities generated by systems and applications, serve as a rich source of information for administrators, developers, and security professionals. The ability to search through logs is essential to help with troubleshooting and debugging by looking through a detailed history of events, errors and warnings. It is also a valuable source of information in context of performance monitoring, security and compliance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Logs, which are records of events and activities generated by systems and applications, serve as a rich source of information for administrators, developers, and security professionals. The ability to search through logs is essential to help with troubleshooting and debugging by looking through a detailed history of events, errors and warnings. It is also a valuable source of information in the context of performance monitoring, security and compliance.
```

This guide provides you with the basics to get started with exploring Logs using the powerful capabilities brought by Grafana and Loki.

## How do I access the logs ?

Once you have [access to your management cluster's grafana]({{< relref "/vintage/getting-started/observability/visualization/access" >}}), you should:

1. Go to `Explore` item in the `Home` menu
![Grafana Explore](loki-explore.png)

2. Select `Loki` datasource on the top left corner
![Loki datasource](loki-datasource-query.png)

3. Choose how you prefer to build your queries:
   * `builder` and play with the dropdowns to build your query
   * `code` to write your query using [LogQL](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/logql/)

__Note__: The live mode feature of Grafana Loki is not available at the moment because we use multi-tenancy (c.f. https://github.com/grafana/loki/issues/9493) 😢

## LogQL basics

Here are a few LogQL basics to help you get started.

### Query anatomy

![Loki Query Anatomy](loki-query-anatomy.png)

### Log stream selectors

> Used to filter the log stream by labels
> 
> ```nohighlight
> =  : equals
> != : not equals
> =~ : regex matches
> !~ : regex does not match

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Log stream selectors are used to filter the log stream by labels. Labels are key-value pairs that can be attached to each log stream. These selectors are used to find specific log streams where the labels match certain conditions.

```nohighlight
=  : This operator checks for label values that are exactly equal to the specified value. It returns all log streams where the label value equals the specified value.

!= : This operator checks for label values that are not equal to the specified value. It returns all log streams where the label value does not equal the specified value.

=~ : This operator is used for regex (regular expression) matching on label values. It returns all log streams where the label value matches the specified regular expression pattern.

!~ : This operator is used when the regular expression does not match the label value. It returns all log streams where the label value does not match the specified regular expression pattern.
```

Author: Do you think we still need the ``` block then?

```

### Filter operators

> Used to filter text within the log stream
> 
> ```nohighlight
> |= : contains
> != : does not contain
> |~ : regex matches
> !~ : regex does not match

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Filter operators are used to refine the selection of text within the log stream. They help you narrow down the results by matching specific patterns or excluding certain data.

```nohighlight
|= : This operator is used when the log stream contains a specific string. It returns all log lines that contain the specified string.
!= : This operator is used when the log stream does not contain a specific string. It filters out and excludes all log lines that contain the specified string.
|~ : This operator is used for regex (regular expression) matching. It returns all log lines where the specified regular expression pattern matches.
!~ : This operator is used when the regular expression does not match the log stream. It filters out and excludes all log lines where the specified regular expression pattern matches.
```

This guide provides you with the basics to get started with exploring Logs using the powerful capabilities brought by Grafana and Loki.

## How do I access the logs ?

Once you have [access to your management cluster's grafana]({{< relref "/vintage/getting-started/observability/visualization/access" >}}), you should:

1. Go to `Explore` item in the `Home` menu
![Grafana Explore](loki-explore.png)

2. Select `Loki` datasource on the top left corner
![Loki datasource](loki-datasource-query.png)

3. Choose how you prefer to build your queries:
   * `builder` and play with the dropdowns to build your query
   * `code` to write your query using [LogQL](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/logql/)

__Note__: The live mode feature of Grafana Loki is not available at the moment because we use multi-tenancy (c.f. https://github.com/grafana/loki/issues/9493) 😢

## LogQL basics

> Here are a few LogQL basics to help you get started.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[LogQL](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/query/) is a powerful querying language for the Loki logging system. It allows users to filter and aggregate log data to facilitate data analysis and troubleshooting. Here you have the basics to help you get started.
```
